[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So many of us have
heard the term, be present,
or, stay in the now, but
what does that really mean?
Many individuals
talk about meditation
as a tool to become present.
But from a scientific
point of view,
I want to offer you a
new way to understand
what it means to
be fully present,
and how you can
use your meditation
practice to transcend your
body, your environment in time
in order to reach the sweet
spot of the generous, present
moment.
I'm your host, Dr. Joe Dispenza,
and in the previous episode,
we went into depth on how change
works in the brain and body.
But how do we get really
focused on this change?
In this episode, we're going to
demystify meditation and show
you how to get into
the present moment
so you can focus on creating
a new personality, and thus,
a new personal reality.
This will help you
understand a fundamental part
of becoming supernatural,
which is to get
past the analytical mind.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Let's start with
the first question.
What does the word
meditation mean?
Now, the word meditation, if you
research the symbol in Tibetan,
the word literally means
"to become familiar with."
Now, familiarization
means, then,
if 95% of who you are by
the time you're 35 years old
is a set of hard-wired thoughts,
unconscious, automatic habits
and behaviors, and reflexive
emotional reactions that
define our
personality, that means
95% of who we are typically
runs in an unconscious or
subconscious program.
Then the first
start to change is
becoming conscious of
your unconscious thoughts,
beginning to become aware
of your automatic actions
and behaviors.
And when you begin
to notice how you're
feeling, as you're beginning
to observe and become
familiar with those
states of mind and body,
you are now no longer the
program, living unconsciously.
Now you're becoming conscious
of your unconscious self.
So think about this, many
people quit in their meditation
practice because
they don't think
they can control their mind.
Well, if you're thinking 60,000
to 70,000 thoughts in one day,
the majority of those
thoughts are the same thoughts
as the day before.
And they're hard-wired,
automatic attitudes
and thoughts.
They're typically
happening behind the scenes
of your awareness.
Thoughts like,
I'll never change.
It's too hard.
My life isn't very good.
I'll never find love in my life.
I'll never find the right job.
These are the
thoughts that people
think constantly, every day.
So then when those
thoughts start
coming to the surface in
their meditation practice,
the moment they
start realizing they
can't control those
thoughts, they give up.
And they buy into the
belief that they're not
very good at meditation.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
But let's start by framing
this a little differently.
The moment you become conscious
of those unconscious thoughts
and you decide not to put
your attention and your energy
behind them, that's a victory.
In other words, the moment you
start noticing those thoughts,
and instead of reacting to
them, just observing them,
you are beginning
to know thyself.
If you notice, then,
in your meditation
practice that your
body is in a program
and it's busy every single
day doing a lot of things,
and it wants to get up
and go do something,
it wants to begin to
habituate and autopilot,
and you become aware that
your body wants to do that,
and instead of responding
to the body as the mind
and getting up and quitting,
if you can settle it
back down into the
present moment,
that's a victory as well.
Because you're saying then
that your body is no longer
the mind, you're the mind.
And those victories add up.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Every time you
work on overcoming
some aspect of your
old personality,
there's a liberation of energy.
And we've measured this on
students all around the world.
Because as they keep
returning the body back
into the present
moment, the body
is the servant to the mind.
And just like
training any animal,
sooner or later, it's
going to acquiesce.
And when it does, there
is a liberation of energy.
And that's available energy
for you to use to heal.
That's available
energy for you to begin
to create a new future.
So then we said in
the last episode
that the process of
change is breaking
the habit of the old self
and reinventing new self.
It's pruning
synaptic connections
and sprouting new connections.
So it makes sense, then, if
you are going to transition
from the old self
to the new self,
and you decide, what thoughts
do I want to fire and wire
in my brain, and you begin
to put all of your energy
in installing those thoughts
neurologically in your brain,
the act of firing and wiring
over and over again begins
to assemble new
neurological networks.
Now, neural networks
are gangs of neurons
that have been fired
and wired together
that relate to a thought,
a memory, a behavior.
The body begins to
assemble new circuits
so it becomes more automatic.
So it makes sense, then, if
you keep firing and wiring
those thoughts, and
they begin to assemble
into automatic
neurological networks,
and you do it over
and over again,
those thoughts
are going to begin
to become familiar to you.
Then the thought in
your mind literally
becomes the experience, and
experience enriches the brain.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now, let's look at another
way to understand meditation.
If we know that we are living
in a state of the familiar past,
or we're living in the state
of the predictable future,
and the familiar past
represents the known,
and the predictable future
represents the known as well,
and the sweet spot of the
generous present moment
represents the unknown, then
in order for us to truly begin
to make significant changes,
where our body isn't
influencing our mind, where our
environment isn't controlling
our feelings and our thoughts,
then it makes sense, then,
that the first step that we
have to use in order to meditate
is to sit our bodies
down and close our eyes
and disconnect from everything
known in our outer environment.
Less sensory information
is coming into the brain.
Now, all of a sudden,
your inner world
starts becoming more real
than your outer world.
If you can sit your body down,
and like training that animal,
saying to your body, you stay.
I'm going to feed you.
You can check your emails.
You can check your text.
You can post
anything on Facebook.
You're going to get a shower.
You're going to get
a cup of coffee.
But right now, you're
no longer the mind.
I'm the mind.
Your body's in a
program, and where
you place your attention is
where you place your energy.
And the moment you're
sitting in your meditation
and you start putting
your attention
on the emotions, familiar
emotions that are connected
to the past, the
moment you start
thinking about those memories
and feeling those emotions,
it makes sense, then, that
you're siphoning your attention
and energy out of the
present moment into the past.
And if you're sitting
there thinking
about the phone calls
you have to make,
the meetings you have to go
to, the shopping list you have
to get to, those
are all known things
in your predictable
future reality.
And every time you
put your attention
on some predictable
future, you're
siphoning energy out
of the present moment
into the predictable future.
And now your energy
is completely
commingled with
that line of time.
So then when you become
aware that your attention is
on those emotions,
and you become aware
and we turn your attention
back to the present moment,
you're disinvesting your
attention and energy out
of your past, present reality
and you're calling it back
to you.
Every time you do
that, it's a victory,
and those victories add up.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now, the stronger
the emotion that you
feel for some problem or
condition in your life,
the more you pay
attention to the cause.
Now, where you
place your attention
is where you place your energy.
If you're sitting
in your meditation
and you're feeling a very
strong emotion that's
connected to some
problem or some person,
we could say then that
you're giving your very life
force away to that
person or that problem.
And that's available
energy that you could be
using to create a new future.
So then as you sit in
your meditation practice,
and your body is used to at
8 o'clock in the morning,
checking emails and getting
frustrated and judgemental,
your body is going to notice
that you're off schedule,
and it's looking
for those chemicals.
If you're aware that
your body is doing that,
and you settle your body back
down into the present moment
and you lower the
volume to that emotion,
you're going to take your
attention off that person
or that condition in your life.
And yes, it takes a greater
level of awareness, a greater
level of energy to begin to
break those energetic bonds
with everything in your
past, present reality
that you're connected
to emotionally.
So then when a
person finally starts
to overcome those
emotions, all of a sudden,
they start calling
energy back to them,
and they begin to build their
own electromagnetic field.
And now they have available
energy to design a new destiny.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So think about meditation as a
form to get beyond your body,
to get beyond your environment.
And what is your
environment made of?
People, objects, places,
everything material
in your three-dimensional
reality.
If you keep your attention
on everything that's known,
you're going to create
more of the known.
So then as you disconnect
from your body,
and you get beyond
all the elements known
in your outer
environment, and you
keep working for the sweet spot
of the generous present moment,
what you're saying
is, I want to begin
to change the way
I think, and I want
to be able to create
something new.
So meditation, then,
allows us to move
from living unconsciously
as a victim, in other words,
allowing our outer world
to control our thoughts
and feelings, to
consciously becoming
the creator of your life
so that your thoughts
and feelings begin
to produce outcomes
in your outer environment.
And so then if you
do this properly,
we should see changes in your
body, in your environment,
and in some future time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now, the purpose
of meditation is
to get beyond your
analytical mind.
Now, what separates
your conscious mind
from your subconscious mind
is your analytical mind.
When you're born, you're
totally subconscious mind.
And we know this to be the case,
because children's brainwaves
for the first six years of their
life are in a very slow state,
and it makes them very
suggestible to information.
In fact, they have no
analytical facilities.
So all the information
that they're exposed to
goes into their
subconscious mind unedited.
For example, big boys don't cry.
Little girls should
be seen and not heard.
Money is the root of all evil.
And when children listen
to this information
without analyzing
it, it begins to lay
the foundation of who they will
become later on in their life
subconsciously.
So if 95% of who we are by
the time we're 35 years old
is our subconscious
mind, then it's
entirely possible
that children become
programmed at a very early
age into some subconscious
behaviors that they're not
even aware of because of things
they've seen or been exposed
to with their parents
or primary caregivers.
So then this circle
represents your mind.
And you learn by these
different positive and negative
identifications and
associations that
give rise to your habits
and your behaviors.
A good example of a positive
identification or association
is when you're young and
you're hungry or uncomfortable
and you cry out.
And the moment you get
fed or the discomfort
has been removed, you learn
to associate subconsciously
crying out with being fed.
So every time you're
uncomfortable or you're hungry
and you cry out, that
behavior produces
a response called getting fed.
And so a good example of
a negative association
is when you're young and you're
exploring your environment,
and all of a sudden, you
walk over to the stove
and you stick your
finger in the flame.
The moment you notice a
change in your internal state,
you pay attention
to the cause of it.
All of a sudden, you begin
to associate that pain
with that white
object in the kitchen.
And all of a sudden, you
start developing a behavior
around it.
And these positive and
negative identifications
and associations begin
to lay the foundation
of our subconscious
habits and behaviors.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now, because brain
waves are changing
and the child is interacting
more in the environment,
and as the child,
by trial and error,
is noticing different feelings
or different experiences that
produce different
emotions, when they
start feeling new
emotions, they begin
to pay attention to the
cause, their brainwaves
start to speed up and
they move into what's
called alpha brainwave
patterns, and they
begin to develop
their analytical mind.
Now, the analytical
mind is exactly what
separates the conscious mind
from the subconscious mind.
And as children's
brainwaves change
because they're interacting
with their environment,
somewhere between
the ages of 6 and 9,
they begin to completely
form their analytical mind.
Once that analytical
mind is formed,
they begin to divide
the conscious mind
from the subconscious mind.
Now, as we've been
saying all along,
your conscious mind is
5% of your total mind.
Your conscious mind
is made up of things
like logic and reasoning,
which gives rise
to your faith, your will,
and your creativity.
Now, your subconscious mind,
as we've been saying all along,
is made up of 95% of who
you are by the time you're
35 years old, and those are
all those hardwired attitudes,
unconscious beliefs and
perceptions, subconscious
habits and behaviors,
and that makes up
the majority of who you are.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now, the analytical mind
is always busy working.
The analytic mind
is important for us,
because we need our analytical
mind to survive in our life.
And because the brain
is divided in half,
the analytical mind is
always weighing past
against future, right against
wrong, known against unknown.
And because the
division of the brain
allows us to navigate with our
analytical mind in our lives,
we need it.
We need our analytical mind
when we're learning new things.
We need our analytical
mind when we're navigating
in our life ethically.
We need our analytical
mind when we
need to make decisions
and choices that
are really important.
But when you throw in
the hormones of stress,
and the brain becomes aroused
because of the emergency state
the brain is in, we
become overly analytical.
When people are
analyzing their lives
within some disturbing
emotion that
are derived from the
hormones of stress,
and those emotions are familiar
emotions from the past,
by thinking in the
box of the past,
they drive their brain further
into a more aroused state,
and they're moving
further away from moving
into those subconscious
states where
they can begin to make change.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So the whole purpose
of meditation,
then, is to get beyond
the analytical mind
and enter the operating system
where those subconscious
programs exist.
So then we can begin to
take limited beliefs,
unconscious habits
and behaviors,
and begin to reprogram them,
become more self-serving
or more effective.
Now, you can't change
the subconscious mind
with your conscious mind.
You have to get beyond
the analytical mind
in order to do that.
So some people have
a very thin veil
between their conscious mind
and their subconscious mind.
And the thinner the veil
between your conscious mind
and subconscious
mind, the more you
are suggestible to information.
In other words,
just like the child,
that information can enter
the subconscious mind
and begin to have
an effect on us.
So we want to be
more suggestible
during the meditative
process because we
want to accept, believe, and
surrender to certain thoughts
without analyzing it so
we can begin to program
our subconscious mind.
So then others have a very
thick veil or thick barrier
between their conscious mind
and their subconscious mind
and they're less
suggestible to information.
And suggestibility
is your ability
to accept, believe, and
surrender to information
without analyzing it,
so the information
doesn't pass through the
analytical mind as easily.
So then the more analytical
you are, the less suggestible
you are to information.
The less analytical you
are, the more suggestible
you are to information.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When you learn how to
control your brainwaves
and move into a
state of trance, you
pause in your brain, and
your brain kind of moves
into stasis.
And in that state where you're
not thinking and analyzing
and you're in a state
of trance, you're
more suggestible to information,
and you move your brainwaves
from the thinking, conscious
mind into a slower brainwave
pattern in the
subconscious mind.
It also makes sense that as
you increase your brainwaves,
you're all of a
sudden increasing
your analytical
facilities, because you're
thinking and analyzing more,
and your brain is less trance,
and you're less
suggestible to information.
So in the meditative
process, as we
begin to reprogram
those subconscious
states of mind and body, what we
want to do is learn the skill,
learn the formula, apply
the tools to practice
getting beyond the
analytical mind
so that you can begin to make
those subconscious changes that
become more permanent.
So when you're living in
a subconscious program,
just like a program
on your computer,
the moment you press play or
start, it runs automatically.
That's exactly what
happens subconsciously.
And many people have
subconscious programs
that are defining their lives.
Even though their conscious
mind wants something else,
their subconscious mind may
be sabotaging their outcome.
So then we have to begin to
reprogram that subconscious
mind and begin to
write a new program.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So now that I've
laid out the basics
of the model of
meditation and how
you can transcend your
analytical mind, your body,
your environment, as
well as the familiar past
and the predictable
future in time,
in order to create a
new life, shouldn't we
be meditating on a daily basis?
And we live in two
states of mind.
We either live in a
state of survival,
or we live in a
state of creation.
And living in survival
is living in stress.
And the majority of
people in this world
spend the majority of
their time living in stress
and living in survival.
In that state, it's
impossible to create.
In the next episode,
we will delve
into survival versus creation,
and how you can further
understand stress and what it
can do to you and your life.
I'm your host, Dr. Joe
Dispenza for "Rewired."
And I hope to see you in
the next episode, where
we go beyond the ordinary
into the extraordinary.
[MUSIC PLAYING]